53
Cancer Simplified
Understanding the Basics of Cancer
Dr. Purvish M. Parikh
MD, DNB, FICP, PhD, ECMO, CPI, MBA
Editor-in-chief
Editor in Chief:
Dr. Purvish M. Parikh
MD, DNB, FICP, Ph.D., ECMO, CPI, MBA
Precision Oncologist and Oncology Public Health Specialist
Imm. Past President, SAARC Federation of Oncologists
Emeritus Editor - IJC and SAJC
Editorial Team :
Dr. Anantbhushan Ranade, Dr. Chetna Bakshi, Dr. Mahesh Sambhus
MD MD MS, DNB, FICS
Medical Oncologist Medical Oncologist Surgical Oncologist
Dr. Amit Bhatt MD, Dr GS Bhattacharyya MD, Dr. Nilesh Lokeshwar
DNB, FMO, ECMO DNB, Ph.D, MRCP MD, DM
Medical Oncologist Medical Oncologist Medical Oncologist
Dr. Amit Parasnis MS, Dr. Girish Phadke, MS Dr. Padmaj Kulkarni MD,
DNB, MNAMS, FICS Surgical Oncologist DM
Surgical Oncologist Medical Oncologist
Dr. Aparna Niphadkar-Joshi Dr. Kamlesh Bokil, MS Dr. Sachin Hingmire MD,
MD, Onco Pathologist Surgical Oncologist DM, Medical Oncologist
Dr. Bhagyashree Khaladkar Dr. Kashinath Bangar Dr. Shailesh Bondarde
MS, DNB, DNB, FIPM MD
Surgical Oncologist Pain & Palliative Oncologist Medical Oncologist
Dr. Chetan Deshmukh Dr. Ketaki Kelkar Dr. Swapnil Karnik, MD
MD, DM, Medical Oncologist MD, Hemato Pathologist Onco Pathologist
Donation suggested `````.
ISBN NO 978-81-923972-3-8
Publisher: JASCAP, Mumbai 400 055
Printer : Surekha Press, Mumbai 400 019
Edition : June 2015
Introduction
About JASCAP
JASCAP (Jeet Association for Support to Cancer Patients) is a
knowledge based NGO registered with the Societies Registration
Act 1860 vide no. 1359/1996 G.B.B.S.D, Mumbai and the Public
Charitable Trusts Act, 1950 vide no. 18751, Mumbai. JASCAP
strives continuously to impart up-to-date and accurate information
on cancer and its management to individuals afflicted with cancer,
as well as their caregivers
Towards this effort, JASCAP manages a bookstall from Tata
Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, as well as runs the JASCAP
Cancer Information Centre. The publications of JASCAP contains
information on different types of cancer, its diagnoses, treatments
and psychological aspects in various Indian languages such as
Hindi, Marathi, Kannada, Gujarati, Bengali, Tamil, Malayalam
and Telugu besides English.
Besides Tata memorial Hospital, Parel, the distribution of cancer
books is also managed from ACTREC, Navi Mumbai, and cancer
hospitals in Ahmedabad, Baroda, Navsari, Surat, Kolkatta,
Bangalore, Hyderabad and Chennai.
By June 2014, JASCAP has provided 200 titles in nine languages
and sold 250,000 copies. JASCAP's publications are also available
for free download from its website. For more information regarding
JASCAP's activities please visit www.jascap.org.
Donations to JASCAP qualify for Income Tax Exemption (under
section 80 G(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961).
Contents
Introduction........................................................................................ 1
Cancer is not one disease ................................................................... 2
What are normal and cancerous cells?................................................ 2
Benign and Malignant tumors............................................................. 3
Diagnosis of cancer............................................................................. 4
Cancer types ....................................................................................... 5
Risk factors ......................................................................................... 6
Warning Signs of Cancer................................................................... 11
Screening .......................................................................................... 12
Symptoms......................................................................................... 13
Investigations.................................................................................... 14
Staging ............................................................................................ 16
Treatment.......................................................................................... 16
Follow up Care................................................................................. 23
Complementary and Alternate Therapy............................................. 24
Nutrition and Physical Activity......................................................... 25
Psychological Support....................................................................... 25
Ancillary Support.............................................................................. 26
Cancer Research................................................................................ 26
Common myths about cancer........................................................... 27
Resources.......................................................................................... 28
Glossary............................................................................................ 29
Contact Us....................................................................................... .40
Cancer Simplified
Understanding the Basics of Cancer
Introduction
Cancer is a major healthcare challenge worldwide. In India about
11 lakh new cancer patients are diagnosed every year (Table 1).
And our current lifestyle suggests that the incidence will continue
to rise. For instance Breast cancer in Maharashtra has increased by
25% from 2001 to 2011 and is projected to increase by a further
by 25% till 2021. Fortunately advances in all facets of healthcare
management now make it possible to cure increasing number of
cancer patients. In fact in some parts of the world, 65% of all
cancers are disease free at 5 year follow up and are labeled as
cured.
Table 1: Comparison of population, cancer incidence, cancer
deaths and cancer prevalence rates in different regions (Noronha
V et al: South Asian Journal of Cancer 2012).
Population New Cancer Cancer 5 year cancer Cancer
Cases/ year Deaths/ year prevalence prevalence
(adults) as proportion
per 100,000
population
World 6,750,062,000 12,662,554 7,564,802 28,803,200 585.8
South
Central Asia 1,728,752,000 1,423,200 979,900 2,682,400 228.7
SAARC
Countries 1,659,700,000 1,296,558 887,355 2,439,285
India 1,247,300,000 948,858 633,455 1,705,085 211.4
What prevents this from being true in India are misconceptions
about the disease, the fear of the unknown and the failure to
complete the intended treatment. This booklet is intended to dispel
the myths that surround cancer and give you a clear idea of what
constitutes cancer.
When you complete reading it you should be able to distinguish
Cancer Simplified | 1
between cancerous growths versus non cancerous disease, know
that each cancer is different (with respect to symptoms, presentation,
growth rate, pattern of spread, propensity for different organs, type
of treatment required, response to treatment and chance of cure),
what is the principle of investigating and treating a cancer and
what you can do to maximize the benefit from your doctor’s
treatment.
Equip yourself with the right knowledge and you can win this battle
against cancer!
Cancer is not one disease
A common mistake that people make is to consider cancer as one
disease. This is not true. There are more than two hundred different
types of cancer that affects human beings. Each one causes different
symptoms and requires a different approach to its management.
To understand this better, let us take the example of a common
ailment, chest pain. Acute chest pain can be due to a heart attack
(myocardial infarction), infection in the lungs (pneumonia),
indigestion (reflux oesophagitis) or even broken ribcage (fractured
ribs). You will agree that each of these cannot be treated as one
disease or expect to have the same outcome.
In a similar manner no patient with cancer is identical to any other
one. Hence do not get influenced by what other patients have to
say or what experiences they have. Protect yourself from such myths
by carefully reading this, understand the disease and refer to the
book whenever you have any doubt.
What are normal and cancerous cells?
An adult human body has more than a 100 trillion such cells -
each one being a completely independent functional and structural
unit. The central nucleus acts like the brain and the rest of the cell
is the factory that carries out the various functions. Normally, these
cells grow and divide to repair and replace cells lost during normal
wear and tear - cells grow old, they die, and new cells take their
place. This is an orderly process wherein just the right number of
cells is produced. This is possible because there is cell to cell cross
talk mediated by chemicals called cytokines. Such cytokines can
2 | JASCAP
act on the same cell (Autocrine) or on neighboring cells (paracrine)
Cancer is nothing but normal human cells that have got transformed
into diseased ones. So let us first understand what a cell is. The
human body is made of organs that consist of tissues and their
smallest unit is the cell. The cell is therefore the building block of
our body and was named as such way back in 1655.
When disease occurs, this normal systematic process is disturbed.
New cells start being produced even when the body does not
require them. There is abnormal and excessive proliferation of
these abnormal cells that do not die. This is usually because the
“switch off” mechanism to stop growth is blocked. Such abnormal
cells do not undergo cell death (Apoptosis) and ultimately form a
mass of cells that is seen as an unusual growth (called a tumor).
What are benign and malignant tumors?
Not all growths are cancerous. They are generally divided into
benign (non cancerous) and malignant (cancerous) growths.
Characteristics of Benign (non cancerous) tumors are:
• They are rarely life-threatening.
• They can be removed easily and usually do not grow
back.
• They normally do not invade the tissues around them.
• They do not spread to other parts of the body.
Features of Malignant (cancer) tumors are:
• They are potentially life-threatening.
• Even if removed, they have tendency to grow back.
• They easily invade and damage nearby tissues and organs.
• If the cancer is not diagnosed and treated in time, the
cancer will grow and the cells will typically spread
(metastasize) to distant parts of the body via the blood
stream. Cancer cells break away from the original
(primary) tumor and move away. They not only invade
neighboring organs but also gain access to the
bloodstream or the lymphatic system. These cells then
travel to distant organs and/or regional lymph nodes,
Cancer Simplified | 3
and start growing elsewhere. This process of spread far
and wide using the blood stream or lymphatic system is
called metastasis.
How is the diagnosis of cancer confirmed?
Under the microscope cells usually show a central nucleus,
surrounding nuclear membrane, outer cytoplasm and then a cell
wall. The cytoplasm also contains several different organelles that
help the cell to carry out its intended function.
These normal cells look different from cancerous cells as seen under
the microscope.
For instance normal cells will have an orderly layout and uniform
shape within the tissues. They will show features of differentiation
based on the function they have to carry out. Such characteristics
are easily identified. In the figure below, the normal cells are all
cuboidal in shape, with a nucleus that is located at one end of the
cell and have a similar size and shape.
On the other hand the cancerous cells will be of a different size/
shape, will not be distributed uniformly, will have a larger nucleus
and will not show typical features of differentiation necessary for
organ / tissue function. As they bulge out onto the surface as a
group, they can become palpable as tumors.
Special staining, like immunohistochemistry, also helps distinguish
normal cells from cancer cells. This is based on a differential
expression of protein particles (antigens, receptors, etc.) either on
the cell surface or within its cytoplasm. This is how the diagnosis
of cancer is made. That is why a tissue biopsy is a must for
confirmation of the diagnosis.
4 | JASCAP
Types of Cancers
There are several ways of dividing the cancers into various types.
For instance on the basis of growth (Doubling time), organ of origin,
morphological appearance under the microscope, molecular
changes (which cannot be seen with the microscope), natural
history (as known previously based on study of large populations)
and anticipated response to therapy.
Currently, cancers are typically divided into various types based
on the organ or tissue of origin.
Cancers that originate from the skin or mucosal lining are
commonly classified as carcinomas. Those that arise from the
connective tissue, bones or muscles are called sarcomas. And the
ones that begin in the hematopoietic or lymphatic system are called
leukemias-lymphomas. Thus, theese consist of three broad
categories – carcinomas, sarcomas and leukemia-lymphomas.
In addition the cancer can be further sub-divided based on the
organ or tissue of origin. For instance whether the carcinomas start
in the lung or breast can help divide them into Lung Carcinoma or
Breast Carcinoma.
Even among the organ specific cancers, it is possible to assign the
proper category based on the subtype of origin of the malignant
cell – in lung carcinoma, the tumor can be further divided into
adenocarcinoma of lung or squamous cell carcinoma of the lung,
and so on.
The more detailed the classification of the type of cancer a patient
has, the better is your doctor’s understanding and hence the better
is your chance of getting the right treatment. This is the reason
why your doctor may ask for a repeat biopsy, especially when
there is some doubt.
If the cancer is not identified and treated in time, it may spread to
distant parts of the body. In such circumstances, the tumor cells in
the new tumor (metastasis) will still retain the pattern and nature
of the original cancer origin and hence will continue to be called
by the name of the original (primary) tumor. For instance, if lung
cancer has spread to the brain, the tumor in the brain will be
called as metastatic lung cancer (and not brain cancer).
Cancer Simplified | 5
Risk Factors
Why do people get cancer? In most instances it will be difficult to
pinpoint the exact cause of cancer in a particular individual. From
past experience and research, it is established that certain factors
increase the risk of an individual developing cancers (as opposed
to the general population that does not have this factor). These are
known as “risk factors”. It is important to remember two points.
The presence of a risk factor does not mean that the individual
will surely have cancer, it only makes the chance of getting cancer
higher. On the other hand the absence of any risk factor does not
ensure that an individual is protected from developing cancer.
Sometimes we do not know what has led to cancer in a particular
individual. Finally risk factors vary from one cancer to another
and can also vary from one region to another.
The common risk factors for cancers in general are:
a) Tobacco
b) Growing older
c) Sunlight
d) Ionizing radiation
e) Chemicals and other substances
f) Viruses and bacteria
g) Hormones
h) Family history of cancer
i) Alcohol
j) Lifestyle - Poor diet, lack of physical activity, or being
overweight
Many of these risk factors can be avoided – like tobacco, chemicals,
hormones, alcohol, and lifestyle. Others may not be under your
control - such as family history, growing old, viral/ bacterial
infections, sunlight. The important thing to remember is to protect
ourselves by staying away from known risk factors whenever
possible.
If you have any of such risk factors for cancer, please see a cancer
doctor or healthcare professional as soon as possible. He can guide
you about reducing your risk as well as make a schedule for your
6 | JASCAP
medical checkups (which may be different from that for people
who do not have risk factors).
• Not everything causes cancer.
• Having one or more risk factors does not mean that you
will get cancer. Most people who have risk factors never
develop cancer.
• Some people are more sensitive than others to the known
risk factors.
• Not having above risk factors does not mean that you
are protected from developing cancers. There are many
things that we do not know. Risk factors that are currently
unknown may play a role.
Tobacco
In India, tobacco is the number one cause of cancers. It is
responsible for almost half the cancers in men and only a slightly
smaller number of cancers in women. It is the most preventable
cause of death. Using tobacco products (smoking, chewing, etc.)
or being around tobacco smoke (environmental or secondhand
smoke) increases the risk of more than 20 different types of cancers.
Tobacco users are more likely than nonsmokers to develop cancer
of the lung, mouth, larynx (voice box), esophagus, bladder, kidney,
throat, stomach, pancreas, or cervix. They also are more likely to
develop acute myeloid leukemia (cancer that starts in blood cells).
That is why the government has banned use of gutka in major
parts of our country. Every six seconds, a person dies due to tobacco
consumption globally. In India, every day there are 2500 deaths
directly related to tobacco use.
Stopping use of tobacco is beneficial in all cases – both before and
after cancer occurs. Even if someone has been using tobacco for
many years, quitting will reduce the risk of developing cancers
significantly. This risk reduction continues for several years. But
remember the risk for ex-tobacco users will remain higher than
that for those who have never used tobacco.
For people who already have/ had cancer, stopping further use of
tobacco will increase the quality of life, will allow better tolerability
Cancer Simplified | 7
of therapy and will also increase chance of survival. Quitting will
also reduce the chance of getting another cancer.
There is a lot of help available for people to stop using tobacco.
Doctors and dentists can prescribe medicines or nicotine
replacement therapy (gum, patches, lozenges, spray, inhaler). They
can refer you to the right local programs or trained professionals
who help people stop using tobacco.
Growing Older
Life expectancy of the typical Indian has doubled since
independence. Today both men and women in our country have
life expectancy exceeding 62 years. Since risk of developing cancer
increases with age, it is logical that as we grow older, this risk
increases. However, it is crucial to remember that cancer can occur
at any age – including during infancy and childhood; during teens
and young adulthood; during senior citizenship and after retirement
too.
Sunlight
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation that comes naturally (from the sun) or is
generated artificially (from sunlamps and tanning booths) can be
harmful. It leads to accelerated aging of the skin, causes skin damage
and can ultimately cause skin cancer. This is particularly important
in the Caucasian population – with white skin. However dark skin
(melanin pigmentation) does not completely protect us from such
damage. Hence this remains a risk factor for us (brown skin people)
too. Common (sensible) precautions recommended to avoid
exposure to UV radiation include:
• Avoid the midday sun (from mid-morning to late
afternoon) whenever possible. Also protect yourself from
reflected UV radiation – from sand, water, snow, and
ice. Remember that UV radiation penetrates light
clothing, windshields, and even glass windows.
• Thick clothing with long sleeves, long pants, a wide brim
headgear and sunglasses that absorb UV are
recommended.
• Using sunscreen may help prevent skin cancer, but only
if the sun protection factor (SPF) is adequate. And they
8 | JASCAP
protect only as long as they remain uniformly spread on
the skin. Remember sunscreens cannot replace avoiding
the sun and/or wearing clothing to protect the skin.
• Sunlamps and tanning booths are to be avoided as much
as possible. Please note that they are no safer than
sunlight.
Ionizing Radiation
Ionizing radiation consists of rays from x-rays (and other radiological
imaging), those entering from outer space, radon gas and
radioactive fallouts. All of them can lead to cell damage and
subsequent cancers.
Medical procedures are necessary and often lifesaving. They can
also be the most common source of exposure to radiation (other
than ambient exposure to background radiation in the atmosphere).
• X-Ray imaging (X-rays, CT Scans, PET Scans, etc.) help
to delineate the existence and/or extent of diseases inside
the body. These help the doctors to decide appropriate
treatment for cancer patients. They also need to be
repeated at varying intervals for different patients.
• Cancers are also treated using radiation therapy (high-
dose radiation) from afar (using large machines;
teletherapy) or from radioactive substances in direct
contact with the patient (brachytherapy). This also leads
to exposure of normal cells to high dose radiation.
Current treatment techniques allow such exposure to be
minimized, but it still exists.
The risk of cancer from low-dose X-rays is extremely
small. The risk from radiation therapy is slightly higher.
For both, the benefit nearly always outweighs the small
risk.
Other rare possibilities include exposure to Radon
(radioactive gas sometimes found in mines – it cannot be seen,
smelt and has no taste) or radioactive fallout (accidents at
nuclear power plants or use of atomic weapons).
Chemicals and Other Substances
Painters, construction workers and those in the chemical industry
Cancer Simplified | 9
exposed to asbestos, benzene, Benzedrine, cadmium, nickel, or
vinyl chloride might have higher risk of cancers. The lay public
should avoid or be very careful in handling pesticides, used engine
oil, paint, solvents or other chemicals.
Viruses and Bacteria
A small fraction of cancers are caused by these or there is increased
susceptibility among infected persons having Human papilloma
viruses (HPVs; cervical and oral cancer), Hepatitis B and hepatitis
C viruses (Liver cancer), Human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
virus (HTLV-1; lymphoma and leukemia), Human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV; lymphoma and Kaposi’s sarcoma),
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV; lymphoma), Helicobacter pylori ( stomach
cancer and lymphoma). Some of these can be prevented by
appropriate vaccination
Hormones
In a few instances, hormones used for illnesses can lead to
development of or increase in susceptibility to cancers. Use of
estrogen, progestin and diethylstilbestrol (DES) may lead to such
a risk.
Family History of Cancer
It is uncommon for cancer to run in a family. However, certain
types of cancer do occur more often in some families than in the
rest of the population (about 5% of cancers - breast, ovary, prostate,
and colon). It is important to distinguish between inherited cancers/
familial cancers (linked to inherited gene changes) versus family
history of cancers (which may be due to shared lifestyle, habits,
environment – like passive smoking). In most instances multiple
cases of cancer in a family are just a matter of chance.
Genetic testing is sometimes recommended to identify whether a
family is at higher risk of developing cancers. Remember that just
the mere presence of an inherited gene does not mean that the
cancer will definitely occur.
Alcohol
Consumption of alcohol increases the risk of cancers of the mouth,
throat, esophagus, larynx, liver, and breast. The risk increases with
10 | JASCAP
the amount of alcohol taken as well as with associated habit of
using tobacco (in any form). It is recommended that these habits
should be avoided or discontinued as soon as possible.
Discontinuing even after cancer has developed will increase the
chance of responding to therapy and improve survival.
Poor Diet, Lack of Physical Activity, or Being Overweight
These three factors are well established as increasing the risk of
many cancers– especially cancers of the colon, uterus, prostate,
breast, colon, esophagus, kidney, and uterus.
A healthy diet, regular exercise and keeping normal body weight
reduces cancer risk. Eat plenty of foods that are high in fiber,
vitamins, and minerals (whole-grain breads, cereals, fruits and
vegetables) on a daily basis. Avoid foods that are high in fat or
calories (such as sugar, butter, whole milk, fried foods, and red
meat). Exercise should be a minimum of brisk walking for at least
30 minutes five or more days a week.
Warning signs of cancer
• A lump somewhere on your body
• Changes in a mole on your skin
• A cough or hoarseness that won’t go away
• A change in bowel habits
• Difficulty in swallowing or continuing indigestion
• Any abnormal bleeding
• A sore or ulcer that won’t heal
• Difficulty passing urine
• Unexplained weight loss
• Unexplained pain
• Feeling very tired all the time
• Skin changes
• Unexplained night sweats
If you or anyone else develops any of the above and they persist, it
is important to consult a doctor immediately. Not all persons with
these symptoms or features will have cancer. But the risk is
Cancer Simplified | 11
sufficiently high to seek urgent medical attention. Ignoring these
can lead to spread of cancer into an incurable stage.
Screening
Screening is a process by which the general population with no
symptoms or complaints is tested to find out whether they are
suffering from cancer or not. This is NOT for a person who has
any of the above warning signs. Not all types of cancers can be
identified by screening. Screening is commonly recommended after
a certain age for cancers of the oral cavity, breast, cervix, colon,
rectum and prostate. By detecting such cancers when there are no
symptoms, there is a good chance of identifying them in early
stage and of curing the patient with less treatment.
For breast cancer options are: A mammogram is the best tool
doctors have to find breast cancer early. A mammogram is a picture
of the breast made with x-rays. The NCI recommends that women
in their forties and older have mammograms every 1 to 2 years.
Women who are at higher-than-average risk of breast cancer should
talk with their health care provider about whether to have
mammograms before age 40 and how often to have them.
Cervix: The Pap test (sometimes called Pap smear) is used to check
cells from the cervix. The doctor scrapes a sample of cells from the
cervix. A lab checks the cells for cancer or changes that may lead
to cancer (including changes caused by human papilloma virus,
the most important risk factor for cancer of the cervix). Women
should begin having Pap tests 3 years after they begin having sexual
intercourse, or when they reach age 21 (whichever comes first).
Most women should have a Pap test at least once every 3 years. An
alternative to pap test is VIA and VILI. These tests use visual
inspection after application of a medicinal solution on the cervix.
It is easy to do and has been shown to be very useful in India.
Colon and rectum: A number of screening tests are used to
detect polyps (growths), cancer, or other problems in the colon
and rectum. People aged 50 and older should be screened. People
who have a higher-than-average risk of cancer of the colon or
rectum should talk with their doctor about whether to have
screening tests before age 50 and how often to have them.
12 | JASCAP
Fecal occult blood test: Sometimes cancer or polyps bleed. This
test can detect tiny amounts of blood in the stool.
Sigmoidoscopy: The doctor checks inside the rectum and lower
part of the colon with a lighted tube called a sigmoidoscope. The
doctor can usually remove polyps through the tube.
Colonoscopy: The doctor examines inside the rectum and entire
colon using a long, lighted tube called a colonoscope. The doctor
can usually remove polyps through the tube.
Double-contrast barium enema: This procedure involves several
x-rays of the colon and rectum. The patient is given an enema
with a barium solution, and air is pumped into the rectum. The
barium and air improve the x-ray images of the colon and rectum.
Digital rectal exam: A rectal exam is often part of a routine physical
exam. The health care provider inserts a lubricated, gloved finger
into the rectum to feel for abnormal areas. A digital rectal exam
allows for examination of only the lowest part of the rectum.
Cologuard: In August 2014, this test was approved as the first non
invasive DNA screening test for colorectal cancer. However its
value in Indian patients is yet to be established.
None of the screening tests is foolproof. Doctors consider many
factors before they suggest a screening test – some of them are a
person’s risk for developing certain types of cancer, age, medical
history, general health, family history, and lifestyle. In addition,
doctors take into consideration whether the screening test can be
harmful or have side effects. If you have any doubts, discuss them
with your healthcare professional.
Symptoms
Cancer can cause many different symptoms. These same symptoms
can also be caused by other diseases. Hence their presence should
be taken seriously and an oncologist should be consulted without
wasting time. Some of the important symptoms are:
• A thickening or lump in the breast or any other part of
the body
Cancer Simplified | 13
• A new mole or a change in size or color of an existing
mole
• A sore that does not heal
• Hoarseness or a cough that does not go away
• Changes in bowel or bladder habits
• Discomfort after eating or during swallowing
• Weight gain or loss with no known reason
• Unusual bleeding or discharge
• Feeling weak or very tired
• Having unexplained fever
Most often, these symptoms are not due to cancer. They may also
be caused by benign tumors or other problems. Remember that
pain is not a feature of early cancer. Waiting till pain develops can
be dangerous.
Investigations/ Diagnosis
If cancer is suspected (either because of a symptom or screening
test result or even a routine medical examination), your oncologist
/ doctor will attempt to confirm the diagnosis. This may involve
additional questions about your personal and family medical
history, physical examination, blood & other tests (including for
tumor markers), imaging (x-rays, sonography, CT Scan, MRI Scan,
PET Scan, bone scan, etc.) or other procedures. Remember the
confirmation of cancer requires looking at your tissue or cells under
the microscope in almost all cases.
Lab Tests
Samples of blood, urine, or other body fluids can tell the doctor
whether a specific organ is functioning normally or not. Tumor
markers can also suggest that the chance of cancer is high. Such
tests allow your oncologist to decide the next course of action –
which may include additional tests, a procedure and/or
commencement of therapy.
Imaging
Imaging provides a visual picture of areas inside your body and
can help tell the oncologist whether an abnormality or tumor exists
14 | JASCAP
or not. The tests include one or more of the following:
X-rays: X-rays are the traditional way of looking at shadows of solid
organs and bones within your body.
Sonography: This uses sound waves to get rebound signals (like a
radar) to see the echo pattern of various tissues inside the body.
These signals are then converted by the computer into images on
a screen that your doctor can analyze. Special equipment will
also allow measurement of flow through hollow organs.
CT scan: This uses x-rays to provide details of organs as if slices
have been taken in various directions. This can be done by itself
or even after a contrast material (such as dye) has been injected
into you.
MRI: Here a strong magnet is linked to a computer and different
settings are used to provide various images. These can help
distinguish details of any abnormality in difficult to visualize places,
including near bones. You will see the same organ examined from
the same direction showing different images (e.g. T1 and T2
weighted images) based on the settings used.
PET scan: This is a functional image. It will show the pattern of
metabolic activity within an organ, based on the nature of a small
amount of radioactive material given to you. Typically cancer cells
show abnormally high activity which persists for a longer time
within the abnormal cells. This imaging is often done in conjunction
with a CT scan to give a better idea of the nature and extent of the
cancer.
Bone scan: This test requires injection of a small amount of a
specific radioactive material that is picked up by bones. It is
particularly useful to detect spread to the bones. Generalized
increased activity may also be seen in a few cancers.
Only small amounts of carefully calculated radioactivity are
injected into your body – which usually gets excreted quickly.
Biopsy
In almost all cases, doctors will need to do a biopsy to make a
proper diagnosis of cancer. For this, the doctor will remove a
Cancer Simplified | 15
sample of tissue which a pathologist will examine under the under
a microscope after processing and/ or staining. The sample may
be removed in several ways:
With a needle attached to a syringe that is used to suck out cells,
tissue or fluid.
With an endoscope (a thin, flexible tube) by which your doctor
can look at specific areas inside the body and also remove tissue,
cells or fluid for examination.
With surgery wherein a part (incisional) or whole (excisional) of
the tumor is removed for evaluation by the pathologist.
Staging
This important step is to identify whether your cancer is in its initial
stage or has spread locally and/or to distant places (metastasis).
Such information is vital for your oncologist to select the right
treatment plan as well as to discuss with you the likely benefit
from treatment. Additional tests for proper staging may be required
and will vary significantly from cancer to cancer (tumor
characteristics) as well as from patient to patient (individual
susceptibility). It is important that such tests be done as soon as
possible and that you consult your oncologist as soon as these
results are available. Delay can result in spread of cancer – making
its treatment less effective, more complicated, prolonged and
expensive.
Treatment
We encourage all patients with cancer (and their close family
members) to discuss actively with their oncologists. It is fully justified
to learn and understand all you can about your disease and
treatment choices. Because most patients and their family members
are often stressed and forget important points of discussion, it is
best to make a list of all your concerns and queries and carry a
copy of the same for your appointment with the oncologist. Patients
also tend to remember only a part of what the healthcare
professional has explained. Taking a responsible member of your
family with you and taking notes will help in better understanding.
16 | JASCAP
Just as it is your doctor’s responsibility to explain to you and answer
your questions, it is also your responsibility to pay attention to all
that your doctor is saying. Do not focus only on the points that
you were hoping to hear. Oncology, like medicine, is not an exact
science. Each patient behaves differently. What the doctor explains
is what generally happens to the majority of patients. It could be
different in your case. Also the oncologist has undergone more
than 10 years of training besides his personal experience. Just
because you or your family member has read a lot (e.g. from the
internet) do not start behaving as if you know everything. After
you have stated your thoughts or quoted what you read elsewhere,
concentrate on what the oncologist is saying. His opinion is going
to be based on significantly more than what information literature
is available to you or your family. Finally never compare your
condition to any other patient. Doing so could be the most
misleading thing for you, since there are so many variables between
individual patients (even those with the same disease, same stage
and same treatment schedule).
Your healthcare professional will ultimately refer you to a cancer
specialist. There are three broad types of such specialists:
1. Surgical Oncologists are involved in doing surgery (including
biopsy);
2. Medical Oncologists and HematoOncologists treat patients
with cancer directed systemic therapy (drugs, injections,
tablets, capsules, etc.); and
3. Radiation Oncologists that use machines that give out radiation
to treat cancers (telethreapy and brachytherapy).
Getting a Second Opinion
It is not unusual for patients to have doubts when faced with the
diagnosis of cancer. Several patients do not want to accept the
diagnosis or its implications. Others are unable to trust their doctor.
When in doubt, it is reasonable to ask for a second opinion before
starting treatment. However, time is the essence. Any delay might
allow your cancer to grow, spread and hence affect your outcome
and/or chance of cure. Discuss with your oncologist if you want a
second opinion. Usually your oncologist will be able to recommend
Cancer Simplified | 17
another oncologist/ specialist in the same or a different hospital. If
you have a preference for a specific oncologist or hospital, please
share this with your oncologist. Do not hesitate to ask your
oncologist for such a reference letter. This will help ensure that
the most important points related to your illness are conveyed
appropriately.
Cancer Treatment Planning
Your cancer treatment plan will depend on several factors, including
but not limited to the type/subtype of cancer, stage of the disease,
predisposing factors, prior treatment and any other existing illnesses
(co-morbidities). Oncologists also factor in your age and general
health.
The goal of treatment also varies. It can be to cure the cancer,
control it or to reduce its symptoms for as long as possible. The
treatment plan is also dynamic and needs to be revised from time
to time.
Almost all patients with cancer will require one or more of the
treatment strategies mentioned below. In rare cases, the oncologist
may also advise to “wait and watch”. This is also a well-accepted
strategy under specific conditions.
Broadly treatment strategies can be divided into local therapy and
systemic therapy:
A. Local Therapy(removes or destroys cancer in just one part of
the body) includes:
1. Surgical Therapy (domain of Surgical Oncologist).
a) Biopsy for diagnosis (incisional/ excisional)
b) Removal of tumor as treatment (conservative/ radical)
2. Radiation Therapy (domain of Radiation Oncologist)
a) Teletherapy (radiation given through machines from a
little distance)
b) Brachytherapy (radiation given by source in direct contact
with the body)
B. Systemic Therapy (sends drugs or substances through the
18 | JASCAP
bloodstream to destroy cancer cells all over the body) includes
(domain of Medical Oncologist).
1. Chemotherapy,
2. Hormonal therapy
3. Targeted therapy
4. Biological therapy
5. Stem Cell Transplantation that includes very high doses
of chemotherapy.
6. Related drugs/ medications.
Some cancers respond best to a single type of treatment. Others
may respond best to a combination of treatments.
Your oncologist can explain to you treatment choices and the likely
expected results. You and your doctor can then together agree on
the treatment plan that is best for you.
No treatment is possible that will not do some damage to normal
or healthy tissue. Hence some side effects may occur. These side
effects depend mainly on the type and extent of the treatment.
Side effects may not be the same for each person, and they may
change from one treatment cycle to the other even in the same
patient and with the same treatment.
Your treatment plan may also include ways to minimize or avoid
common side effects. Supportive care is used not only to address
side effects of therapy, but also to control symptoms (like pain,
fatigue, nausea) as well as emotional and practical problems.
Therefore supportive care is an integral part of the cancer treatment
plan for patients.
You may want to talk to the doctor about taking part in a clinical
trial (a research study of new treatment methods). Several new ways
of treating cancer are being studied and their value evaluated under
strict regulatory, legal and ethical framework. You may want to
explore if such an ongoing trial is applicable in your case.
Surgical Treatment
In most cases, the surgical oncologist will remove the tumor and
some normal tissue around it. Removing surrounding normal tissue
Cancer Simplified | 19
may help prevent the tumor from recurring or regrowing. The
surgeon may also remove some nearby lymph nodes, since cancer
has the propensity to spread by lymphatics as well as blood stream.
Remember that it takes time to heal after such a surgery. The time
needed to recover varies from person to person as well as from
surgery to surgery. The time taken for the surgery or the time taken
to recover from it has no bearing on your outcome.
While recovering from surgery, you may feel pain or other
uncomfortable symptoms. Please discuss this with your healthcare
professional as early as possible. Taking medicines to control them
is important and can also help in faster recovery from the surgery.
Do not tolerate such symptoms on your own without bringing
them to the notice of your doctors or nurses.
Some people have the misconception that surgery (or even a biopsy)
for cancer can lead to spread the disease – with or without exposure
to air. Cancer progresses on its own at its own pace, which can
change without any outside factors. Besides, biopsy is a must for
the correct diagnosis of cancer. Also remember that surgeons use
special methods and take many steps to prevent cancer cells from
spreading.
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy (or radiotherapy) uses high-energy rays to kill
cancer cells. Most patients needing radiation therapy are given
external radiation. The first two mentioned below are common
and the third one is used less often and only in specific cases.
Teletherapy (External radiation): The radiation comes from a large
machine outside the body. Most people go to a hospital or clinic
for treatment 5 days a week for several weeks.
Brachytherapy (implant or contact radiation): The radiation comes
from radioactive material placed in seeds, needles, or thin plastic
tubes that are put in or near the tissue. The patient usually stays in
the hospital. The implants generally remain in place for several
days.
Systemic (internal) radiation: Here liquid or capsules containing
very carefully calculated dose of radioactive material is given to
be swallowed or injected into the body. It then travels throughout
20 | JASCAP
the body and helps treat cancer or control its pain (especially caused
by cancer that has spread to the bones).
Radiation therapy is commonly given daily for five days a week
for several weeks. It can also be given in a single fraction or multiple
exposures in a day. There is a lot of computerization to ensure that
the beam of radiation is administered accurately. Typically this
requires accurate positioning of the patient on a special table and
careful focusing of the beam - which takes time.
In teletherapy, the actual duration of each fraction of radiation is
only a few minutes. While the radiation is being administered, the
patient normally does not feel, hear, see or smell the radiation.
Some patients may hear the hum of the machinery and a few may
even feel warmth at the site of the radiation – but nothing else.
Side effects of radiation therapy depend mainly on the dose and
type of radiation given as well as the part in the body treated. For
example, radiation to abdomen may cause nausea, vomiting or
diarrhea. The skin overlying the treated area may become red,
dry, and tender. All hair in the treated area is likely to be lost –
maybe even permanently.
Weakness may be experienced by some patients. This can increase
a few weeks after the commencement of the radiation. Drinking
plenty of liquids and adequate rest is important. At the same time,
it is important to remain active as much as possible.
Other side effects may also occur. Your radiation oncologist will
be able to discuss this further as well as give you advice on how to
avoid, minimize or reduce their effect. Fortunately, most side effects
go away gradually after the radiation ends.
Systemic Therapy
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is the use of drugs (either singly or more often in
combination) that are used to kill cancer cells anywhere in the
body. These drugs can be given by various routes – the most
common being by injection (either as a push or in IV fluids) or
orally. The drug then enters the circulation and reaches all over
the body. Chemotherapy drugs are given with careful selection of
Cancer Simplified | 21
dose, duration of infusion, days of administration and frequency
of repeating them. These details make up the chemotherapy
protocol schedule and it gets repeated in what are called cycles.
Cycles can be of different durations as well. Generally there is rest/
recovery period within cycles as well as in between cycles. This
allows the normal cells in the body to recover. Based on patient,
drug and schedule factors, chemotherapy may be administered in
day care or after hospitalization.
Side effects depend mainly on the specific drugs and the dose –
being mostly on normal rapidly dividing cells:
• Blood cells: Hemoglobin (weakness, fatigue), WBCs
(infections) and Platelets (bleeding).
• Cells in Skin, Mucosa and Hair: Hair loss, ulcers in
mouth, change in color of skin.
• Digestive system Cells: loss of appetite, nausea and
vomiting, diarrhea.
• Cells involved in fertility: Some drugs lead to infertility.
No matter how severe or difficult such side effects are, they are
usually temporary. The medical oncologist will use means to
prevent, reduce or minimize risk of such side effects.
Hormone Therapy
Cancers dependent on hormones for their growth, may respond to
hormonal manipulation. Hormone therapy can be given using
drugs or surgery:
Drugs: The doctor gives medicine that stops the production of
certain hormones or prevents the hormones from working.
Surgery: The surgeon removes organs (such as the ovaries or
testicles) that make hormones.
The side effects of hormone therapy are also highly variable and
may include one or more of the following - weight gain, hot flashes,
nausea, menstrual irregularity, vaginal dryness (in women) and
impotence, loss of sexual desire, breast growth or tenderness (in
men).
Targeted Therapy
Currently several drugs are available that specifically target the
22 | JASCAP
cancer cells, with minimal effect on normal cells. This is possible
due to better understanding of the mechanism of how genetic
changes are driving the growth of cancers. Their use requires careful
testing in the blood or tumor tissue to identify biomarkers/ molecular
signals of what is the genetic change that is making the tumor cell
grow. Such treatment increases chance of cure/ response and is
often combined with other therapy, especially chemotherapy.
Hematopoietic (Blood) Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT)
Sometimes the cancer needs very high dose systemic therapy to be
killed. Such high doses will also kill all normal blood forming
cells and immune cells in the bone marrow. Hence, for the patient
to recover, normal healthy blood forming stem cells will need to
be given. This process is called HSCT. The cells to be taken from
the patient’s own body (autologous) before the high dose therapy
or from another person (allogeneic).These new cells are given like
a blood transfusion through a large vein. Over several weeks, new
blood cells develop from these transplanted stem cells and patients
stay in the hospital in isolation till recovery is complete.
Side effects of HSCT include infection, bleeding and related
complications. If the stem cells are allogeneic, a disease called
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) may occur, wherein the donated
stem cells “identify” the patient’s body as “foreign” and mount an
immune response against it. GVHD usually affects the liver, skin,
or digestive tract. GVHD can be severe or even fatal. Doctors use
drugs to help prevent, treat, or control GVHD.
Follow-up Care
Today, with proper and timely detection and care, more than half
the patients with cancer can be cured. Once the main treatment is
over and the investigations show that there is no cancer left in the
body, a follow up plan is necessary. This is because undetected
cancer cells may still remain in the body after treatment. Hence
doctors can never be sure that the cancer will not come back.
Although the cancer seems to be completely removed or destroyed,
it can return. This is called recurrence.
Follow up plan is to be tailored to each patient and can be different
Cancer Simplified | 23
for patients with the same cancer and the same stage – due to
individual differences. By finding out whether the cancer has
returned in a timely manner, second line therapy can be
administered to improve the chance of response. Your doctor will
therefore make a follow up plan that may include one or more of
the following – history of symptoms, physical examination,
laboratory blood tests, imaging tests like x-rays and other special
tests. During follow-up exams, the doctor will also keep an eye for
other problems like side effects from cancer therapy that can arise
long after treatment.
Checkups help ensure that patients have the best possible outcome.
In case patients develop a new health problem before the next
scheduled visits, they should contact their doctor immediately.
Complementary and Alternative Medicine(CAM)
Some people with cancer use non allopathic (non modern systems
of medicine). This includes ayurvedic, herbal, homeopathic, sidha,
unani, naturopathy, yoga, acupuncture, meditation, spiritual
healing, etc.
• An approach is generally called complementary
medicine when it is used along with standard treatment
with modern medicine.
• An approach is called alternative medicine when it is
used in place of standard modern medicine treatment.
Many people say that CAM helps them feel better. However, some
types of CAM may change the way standard treatment works. These
changes could be harmful. Other types of CAM could be harmful
even if used alone. The doctor from modern medicine (Allopathy)
should not be expected to know about how these other systems of
medicine are supposed to work. However it is of utmost importance
that patients share all the information about any other medicine
they are taking/ planning to take while consulting the cancer
specialist. Unless this is done, patients may be exposed to serious
harm that could occur by the interactions between medicines of
different systems.
24 | JASCAP
Nutrition and Physical Activity
People with cancer have a vital role to play in taking care of
themselves by eating well and also by maintaining sufficient
physical activity.
Maintaining strength and weight of the body requires proper intake
of calories. Cancer is a major disease and usually increases the
caloric requirement for patients. Hence eating well is an integral
part of making sure patients feel better and have sufficient energy.
Sometimes, especially during or soon after treatment, patients may
not feel like eating – due to nausea, vomiting or loss of appetite.
Patients may also be uncomfortable or tired. Foods may also taste
different. Mouth sores can be an additional problem in others.
The oncologist, family doctor, dietitian, or other health care
provider can show what and how to eat well even under such
circumstances.
Cancer patients should try to remain active within the limits
permitted by their disease and advice of their cancer specialist.
Walking, yoga, swimming, etc. can keep patients fit and energetic.
Exercise can even help by reducing nausea, stress and pain. Patients
should ensure that the level of physical activity does not cause
them to have pain or feel tired. Patients should discuss with their
doctors before commencing physical exercise as well as if the
exercise is causing any problems.
Psychological Support
It is very common for patients faced with cancer to have anxiety
and/ or depression. Some patients also go through phases of anger
and frustration. Most such problems are temporary. Having
someone to talk to during these times is vital. If the level of these
problems is high, proper evaluation by a psychologist/ psychiatrist
is also valuable. There are special questionnaires that can identify
whether patients need additional help or not. This could be in the
form of reassurance, explanation about what to expect during the
course of treatment, relaxation measures and even medication.
The earlier such expert help is sought, the faster it will work and
the quicker can there be complete recovery.
Cancer Simplified | 25
Ancillary Support
Patients with cancer sometimes have a lot of questions not related
directly to their illness or its treatment. Such thoughts can also
cause concern and anxiety. For instance worrying about the family,
job, finances and daily routine; concerns about managing side
effects, hospital stays, and medical bills are also common. Doctors,
nurses, and other healthcare professionals can answer some of these
questions – those that are directly related to the treatment, side
effects and physical activity. Additional help is available from
psychologists, counselors and social worker. Friends and relatives
can also be very supportive. In the hospital, talking to other cancer
patients and their family members may also provide details of other
support groups that may be available, especially NGOs. In these
groups, patients or their family members share their experience
and skills/ resources developed for coping with cancer. While doing
this, it is vital to remember that each patient is different – what
works for one patient does not necessarily work for another patient.
The Promise of Cancer Research
Not all patients with cancer can be cured today. Hence there is an
unmet need for improvement. This is possible only by doing
medical research. All over the world attempts are ongoing to find
new and better ways to prevent, detect, diagnose, and treat cancer.
Their true value can only be proven by doing clinical trials in
patients. This is the most important tool to improve the care and
cure of cancer patients.
A clinical trial is the final stages of a very systematic, long and
careful research process. The potential new drugs/ methods will
have passed several years of rigorous evaluation in the laboratory
and animals before being approved for study in human subjects.
This step is essential to demonstrate whether treatments that work
well in the lab or in animals will also prove to be of benefit to
people. Hence clinical trials are needed to find out whether new
approaches to cancer prevention, detection, diagnosis, and
treatment are safe and effective.
It is only through such clinical trials that the chance of cure in
26 | JASCAP
cancers has improved dramatically. For instance the five year
survival of childhood leukemia was 10% in 1960s and currently it
is more than 95%. Such knowledge and progress against cancer
would not have been possible without clinical trials. There are
several lakh patients with cancer who are alive and cured of their
disease thanks to clinical trials on new drugs.
People who join clinical trials may be among the first to benefit if
a new approach turns out to be effective. Studies have clearly
shown that survival of patients participating in clinical trials is better
that those who do not participate in such trials. Such participation
also makes an important contribution by helping medical science
learn more about cancer and how to prevent, detect, and control
it. Clinical trials deal with the unknown and hence may pose some
risks. Researchers will explain such details at the time of offering
entry into a clinical trial to patients. Patients will have the right to
ask questions, clarifications and then take a decision on whether
they want to enroll into a clinical trial or not. The patient’s decision
is always respected by the entire healthcare team. Irrespective of
what decision is taken about clinical trial participation, each patient
continues to receive the best of the treatment.
People are encouraged to talk to their oncologist whether they are
eligible for any clinical trial.
Common myths about cancer
1. Cancer is not contagious. Cancer itself cannot spread from a
patient to others. Although being infected with certain viruses
or bacteria may increase the risk of some types of cancer, no
one can “catch” cancer from another person. Hence it is
perfectly safe to share the same room, eat from the same plates
and use the same towel as any cancer patient. There is no risk
of getting cancer in this manner.
2. Hereditary cancers form less than 5% of all cancers. In most
instances cancer is not due to inherited genes. Family history
of cancer is different from hereditary cancers. This is because
families may be sharing other risk factors that can increase
risk of cancer – like sedentary lifestyle, exposure to smoke/
tobacco and eating habits (high fat/ caloric food).
Cancer Simplified | 27
3. Cancer is not caused by an injury, such as a bump or bruise.
However a long standing scar (like a keloid) or repeated
injuries (for example due to constant rubbing by a sharp tooth)
can lead to a precancerous or cancerous condition. Often an
injury will first draw attention to the site where injury has
occurred and hence a pre-existing cancer gets detected.
Resources
Besides our website (www.jascap.org), additional information can
also be found at the following websites:
www.oncologyindia.org
www.ismpo.org
www.sajc.org
www.indiancancersociety.org
www.aroi.org
www.indiansocietyofoncology.org
www.iasoindia.in
www.oncologygoldstandard.com
www.lcca.com
www.jdhc.info
www.indianjcancer.com
28 | JASCAP
Glossary
Acupuncture (AK-yoo-PUNK-cher): The technique of inserting thin
needles through the skin at specific points on the body to control
pain and other symptoms. It is a type of complementary and
alternative medicine.
AIDS: Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (ah-KWY-erd im-
YOON-o-de-FISH-en-see SIN-drome). A disease caused by the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). People with AIDS are at an
increased risk for developing certa in cancers and for infections
that usually occur only in individuals with a weak immune system.
Bacteria (bak-TEER-ee-uh): A large group of single cell
microorganisms. Some cause infections and disease in animals and
humans. The singular of bacteria is bacterium.
BCG solution: A form of biological therapy for superficial bladder
cancer. A catheter is used to place the BCG solution into the
bladder. The solution contains live, weakened bacteria (bacille
Calmette- Guérin) that activate the immune system. The BCG
solution used for bladder cancer is not the same thing as BCG
vaccine, a vaccine for tuberculosis.
Benign (beh-NINE): Not cancerous. Benign tumors do not spread
to tissues around them or to other parts of the body.
Biological therapy (by-o-LAHJ-i-kul): Treatment to stimulate or
restore the ability of the immune system to fight infections and
other diseases. Also used to lessen certain side effects that may be
caused by cancer treatment. Also known as immunotherapy,
biotherapy, or biological response modifier (BRM) therapy.
Biopsy (BY-op-see): The removal of cells or tissues for examination
by a pathologist. The pathologist may study the tissue under a
microscope or perform other tests. When only a sample of tissue is
removed, the procedure is called an incisional biopsy. When an
entire lump or suspicious area is removed, the procedure is called
an excisional biopsy. When a sample of tissue or fluid is removed
with a needle, the procedure is called a needle biopsy, core biopsy,
or fine-needle aspiration.
Bone marrow: The soft, sponge-like tissue in the center of most
Cancer Simplified | 29
large bones. It produces white blood cells, red blood cells, and
platelets.
Brachytherapy (BRAKE-ih-THER-a-pee): A procedure in which
radioactive material sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters is
placed directly into or near a tumor. Also called internal radiation,
implant radiation, or interstitial radiation therapy.
Cancer: A term for diseases in which abnormal cells divide without
control. Cancer cells can invade nearby tissues and can spread
through the bloodstream and lymphatic system to other parts of
the body. There are several main types of cancer. Carcinoma is
cancer that begins in the skin or in tissues that line or cover internal
organs. Sarcoma is cancer that begins in bone, cartilage, fat,
muscle, blood vessels, or other connective or supportive tissue.
Leukemia is cancer that starts in blood-forming tissue such as the
bone marrow, and causes large numbers of abnormal blood cells
to be produced and enter the bloodstream. Lymphoma and multiple
myeloma are cancers that begin in the cells of the immune system.
Cell: The individual unit that makes up the tissues of the body. All
living things are made up of one or more cells.
Chemotherapy (kee-mo-THER-a-pee): Treatment with drugs that
kill cancer.
Clinical trial: A type of research study that tests how well new
medical interventions work in people. Such studies test new
methods of screening, prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of a
disease. Studies may be carried out in a clinic or other medical
facility. Also called a clinical study.
Colonoscopy (ko-lun-AHS-ko-pee): An examination of the inside
of the colon using a thin, lighted tube (called a colonoscope)
inserted into the rectum. If abnormal areas are seen, tissue can be
removed and examined under a microscope to determine whether
disease is present.
Complementary and alternative medicine: CAM.
Forms of treatment that are used in addition to (complementary)
or instead of (alternative) standard
30 | JASCAP
treatments. These practices generally are not considered standard
medical approaches. Standard
treatments have gone through a long and careful research process
to prove they are safe and effective, but less is known about CAM.
CAM may include dietary supplements, megadose vitamins, herbal
preparations, special teas, acupuncture, massage therapy, magnet
therapy, spiritual healing, and meditation.
CT scan: Computed tomography scan. A series of detailed pictures
of areas inside the body taken from different angles; the pictures
are created by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. Also called
computerized tomography and computerized axial tomography
(CAT) scan.
Diethylstilbestrol (dye-ETH-ul-stil-BES-trol): DES. A synthetic form
of the hormone estrogen that was prescribed to pregnant women
between about 1940 and 1971 because it was thought to prevent
miscarriages. DES may increase the risk of uterine, ovarian, or breast
cancer in women who took it. DES also has been linked to an
increased risk of clear cell carcinoma of the vagina or cervix in
daughters exposed to DES before birth.
Dietitian: A health professional with special training in nutrition
who can help with dietary choices. Also called a nutritionist.
Digestive tract (dye-JES-tiv): The organs through which food and
liquids pass when they are swallowed, digested, and eliminated.
These organs are the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small and large
intestines, and rectum.
Digital rectal exam: DRE. An examination in which a doctor inserts
a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for abnormalities.
Double-contrast barium enema: A procedure in which x-rays of
the colon and rectum are taken after a liquid containing barium is
put into the rectum. Barium is a silver-white metallic compound
that outlines the colon and rectum on an x-ray and helps show
abnormalities. Air is put into the rectum and colon to further
enhance the x-ray.
Epstein-Barr virus: EBV. A common virus that remains dormant in
most people. It has been associated with certain cancers, including
Cancer Simplified | 31
Burkitt’s lymphoma, immunoblastic lymphoma, and
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Estrogen (ES-tro-jin): A hormone that promotes the development
and maintenance of female sex characteristics.
Excisional biopsy (ek-SI-zhun-al BY-op-see): A surgical procedure
in which an entire lump or suspicious area is removed for diagnosis.
The tissue is then examined under a microscope.
External radiation (ray-dee-AY-shun): Radiation therapy that uses
a machine to aim high-energy rays at the cancer. Also called
external-beam radiation.
Fecal occult blood test (FEE-kul o-KULT): FOBT. A test to check
for blood in stool. (Fecal refers to stool; occult means hidden.)
Fertility (fer-TIL-i-tee): The ability to produce children.
Gene: The functional and physical unit of heredity passed from
parent to offspring. Genes are pieces of DNA, and most genes
contain the information for making a specific protein.
Genetic testing: Analyzing DNA to look for a genetic alteration
that may indicate an increased risk for developing a specific disease
or disorder.
Helicobacter pylori (HEEL-ih-ko-BAK-ter pye-LOR-ee): H. pylori.
Bacteria that cause inflammation and ulcers in the stomach and
small intestine.
Hematologist (hee-ma-TOL-o-jist): A doctor who specializes in
treating blood disorders.
Hepatitis B virus: A virus that causes hepatitis (inflammation of the
liver). It is carried and passed to others through blood or sexual
contact. Also, infants born to infected mothers may become
infected with the virus.
Hepatitis C virus: A virus that causes hepatitis (inflammation of the
liver). It is carried and passed to others through blood or sexual
contact. Also, infants born to infected mothers may become
infected with the virus.
32 | JASCAP
Hormone: A chemical made by glands in the body. Hormones
circulate in the bloodstream and control the actions of certain
cells or organs. Some hormones can also be made in a laboratory.
Hormone therapy: Treatment that adds, blocks, or removes
hormones. For certain conditions (such as diabetes or menopause),
hormones are given to adjust low hormone levels. To slow or stop
the growth of certain cancers (such as prostate and breast cancer),
hormones may be given to block the body’s natural hormones.
Sometimes surgery is needed to remove the gland that makes
hormones. Also called hormonal therapy, hormone treatment, or
endocrine therapy.
Human herpes virus 8: HHV8. A member of the herpes family of
viruses. It is a risk factor for Kaposi’s sarcoma, a rare cancer that
can cause skin lesions.
Human immunodeficiency virus: HIV. The cause of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Human papilloma virus (pap-ih-LO-ma-VYE-rus): HPV. A virus that
causes abnormal tissue growth (warts) and is associated with some
types of cancer.
Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1: A retrovirus that infects T
cells (a type of white blood cell) and can cause leukemia and
lymphoma. HTLV-1 is spread by sharing syringes or needles used
to inject drugs, through sexual contact, and from mother to child
at birth or through breast-feeding.
Imaging procedure: A method of producing pictures of areas inside
the body.
Implant radiation (ray-dee-AY-shun): A procedure in which
radioactive material sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters is
placed directly into or near a tumor. Also called brachytherapy,
internal radiation, or interstitial radiation.
Incisional biopsy (in-SIH-zhun-al BY-op-see): A surgical procedure
in which a portion of a lump or suspicious area is removed for
diagnosis. The tissue is then examined under a microscope.
Infection: Invasion and multiplication of germs in the body.
Cancer Simplified | 33
Infections can occur in any part of the body, and can spread
throughout the body. The germs may be bacteria, viruses, yeast,
or fungi. They can cause a fever and other problems, depending
on where the infection occurs. When the body’s natural defense
system is strong, it can often fight the germs and prevent infection.
Cancer treatment can weaken the natural defense system.
Infertility: The inability to produce children.
Internal radiation (ray-dee-AY-shun): A procedure in which
radioactive material sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters is
placed directly into or near a tumor. Also called brachytherapy,
implant radiation, or interstitial radiation therapy.
Ionizing radiation (EYE-ah-NIZE-ing ray-dee-AYshun): A type of
high-frequency radiation produced by x-ray procedures, radioactive
substances, rays that enter the Earth’s atmosphere from outer space,
and other sources. Ionizing radiation can enter cells and lead to
health risks, including cancer, at certain doses.
Leukemia (loo-KEE-mee-a): Cancer that starts in blood-forming tissue
such as the bone marrow, and causes large numbers of blood cells
to be produced and enter the bloodstream.
Leukocyte (LOO-ko-site): A white blood cell. Refers to a blood
cell that does not contain hemoglobin. White blood cells include
lymphocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages, and mast
cells. These cells are made by bone marrow and help the body
fight infection and other diseases.
Local therapy: Treatment that affects cells in the tumor and the
area close to it.
Lymph node (limf node): A rounded mass of lymphatic tissue that
is surrounded by a capsule of connective tissue. Lymph nodes filter
lymph (lymphatic fluid), and they store lymphocytes (white blood
cells). They are located along lymphatic vessels. Also called a lymph
gland.
Lymphatic system (lim-FAT-ik SIS-tem): The tissues and organs that
produce, store, and carry white blood cells that fight infections
and other diseases. This system includes the bone marrow, spleen,
34 | JASCAP
thymus, lymph nodes, and lymphatic vessels (a network of thin
tubes that carry lymph and white blood cells). Lymphatic vessels
branch, like blood vessels, into all the tissues of the body.
Lymphoma (lim-FO-ma): Cancer that begins in cells of the immune
system.
Malignant (ma-LIG-nant): Cancerous. Malignant tumors can invade
and destroy nearby tissue and spread to other parts of the body.
Mammogram (MAM-o-gram): An x-ray of the breast.
Medical oncologist (MED-i-kul on-KOL-o-jist): A doctor who
specializes in diagnosing and treating cancer using chemotherapy,
hormonal therapy, and biological therapy. A medical oncologist
often is the main health care provider for someone who has cancer.
A medical oncologist also provides supportive care and may
coordinate treatment provided by other specialists.
Melanoma (MEL-ah-NO-ma): A form of skin cancer that arises in
melanocytes, the cells that produce pigment. Melanoma usually
begins in a mole.
Menopausal hormone therapy: Hormones (estrogen, progesterone,
or both) given to women after menopause to replace the hormones
no longer produced by the ovaries. Also called hormone
replacement therapy or HRT.
Menopause (MEN-o-pawz): The time of life when a woman’s
menstrual periods stop permanently. Also called “change of life.”
Metastasis (meh-TAS-ta-sis): The spread of cancer from one part of
the body to another. A tumor formed by cells that have spread is
called a “metastatic tumor” or a “metastasis.” The metastatic tumor
contains cells that are like those in the original (primary) tumor.
The plural form of metastasis is metastases (meh-TAS-taseez).
Mole: A benign growth on the skin (usually tan, brown, or flesh-
colored) that contains a cluster of melanocytes and surrounding
supportive tissue.
MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging (mag-NET-ik REZ-o-nans IM-a-
jing). A procedure in which radio waves and a powerful magnet
Cancer Simplified | 35
linked to a computer are used to create detailed pictures of areas
inside the body. These pictures can show the difference between
normal and diseased tissue. MRI makes better images of organs
and soft tissue than other scanning techniques, such as CT or x-
ray. MRI is especially useful for imaging the brain, spine, the soft
tissue of joints, and the inside of bones. Also called nuclear
magnetic resonance imaging.
Mutation: Any change in the DNA of a cell. Mutations may be
caused by mistakes during cell division, or they may be caused by
exposure to DNA-damaging agents in the environment. Mutations
can be harmful, beneficial, or have no effect. If they occur in cells
that make eggs or sperm, they can be inherited; if mutations occur
in other types of cells, they are not inherited. Certain mutations
may lead to cancer or other diseases.
Organ: A part of the body that performs a specific function. For
example, the heart is an organ.
Pap test: The collection of cells from the cervix for examination
under a microscope. It is used to detect cancer and changes that
may lead to cancer. Also called a Pap smear.
Pathologist (pa-THOL-o-jist): A doctor who identifies diseases by
studying cells and tissues under a microscope.
PET scan: Positron emission tomography scan. A procedure in which
a small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a
vein, and a scanner is used to make detailed, computerized pictures
of areas inside the body where the glucose is used. Because cancer
cells often use more glucose than normal cells, the pictures can be
used to find cancer cells in the body.
Polyp (POL-ip): A growth that protrudes from a mucous membrane.
Primary tumor: The original tumor.
Progestin (pro-JES-tin): Any natural or laboratorymade substance
that has some or all of the biologic effects
If progesterone, a female hormone.
Quality of life: The overall enjoyment of life. Many clinical trials
assess the effects of cancer and its treatment on the quality of life.
36 | JASCAP
These studies measure aspects of an individual’s sense of well-being
and ability to carry out various activities.
Radiation oncologist (ray-dee-AY-shun on-KOLo- jist): A doctor
who specializes in using radiation to treat cancer.
Radiation therapy (ray-dee-AY-shun THER-ah-pee): The use of high-
energy radiation from x-rays, gamma rays, neutrons, and other
sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation may come
from a machine outside the body (external-beam radiation therapy),
or it may come from radioactive material placed in the body near
cancer cells (internal radiation therapy, implant radiation, or
brachytherapy). Systemic radiation therapy uses a radioactive
substance, such as a radiolabeled monoclonal antibody, that
circulates throughout the body. Also called radiotherapy.
Radioactive: (RAY-dee-o-AK-tiv): Giving off radiation.
Radioactive fallout (RAY-dee-o-AK-tiv): Airborne radioactive
particles that fall to the ground during and after an atomic bombing,
nuclear weapons test, or nuclear plant accident.
Radionuclide scan (RAY-dee-o-NEW-klide): A test that produces
pictures (scans) of internal parts of the body. The person is given
an injection or swallows a small amount of radioactive material; a
machine called a scanner then measures the radioactivity in certain
organs.
Radon (RAY-don): A radioactive gas that is released by uranium, a
substance found in soil and rock.
Breathing in too much radon can damage lung cells and lead to
lung cancer.
Recurrence: The return of cancer, at the same place as the original
(primary) tumor or in another location, after the tumor had
disappeared.
Risk factor: Something that may increase the chance of developing
a disease. Some examples of risk factors for cancer include age, a
family history of certain cancers, use of tobacco products, certain
eating habits, obesity, exposure to radiation or other cancer-causing
Cancer Simplified | 37
agents, and certain genetic changes.
Screening: Checking for disease when there are no symptoms.
Side effect: A problem that occurs when treatment affects healthy
tissues or organs. Some common side effects of cancer treatment
are fatigue, pain, nausea, vomiting, decreased blood cell counts,
hair loss, and mouth sores.
Sigmoidoscopy (sig-moid-OSS-ko-pee): Inspection of the lower
colon using a thin, lighted tube called a sigmoidoscope. Samples
of tissue or cells may be collected for examination under a
microscope. Also called proctosigmoidoscopy.
Sonogram (SAHN-o-gram): A computer picture of areas inside the
body created by bouncing high-energy sound waves (ultrasound)
off internal tissues or organs. Also called an ultrasonogram.
Spiral CT scan: A detailed picture of areas inside the body. The
pictures are created by a computer linked to an x-ray machine
that scans the body in a spiral path. Also called helical computed
tomography.
Stage: The extent of a cancer within the body. Staging it based on
the size of the tumor, whether lymph nodes contain cancer, and
whether the disease has spread from the original site to other parts
of the body.
Stem cell: A cell from which other types of cells develop. Blood
cells develop from blood-forming stem cells.
Stem cell transplantation: A method of replacing immature blood-
forming cells that were destroyed by cancer treatment. The stem
cells are given to the person after treatment to help the bone marrow
recover and continue producing healthy blood cells.
Supportive care: Care given to improve the quality of life of patients
who have a serious or life-threatening disease. The goal of supportive
care is to prevent or treat as early as possible the symptoms of the
disease, side effects caused by treatment of the disease, and
psychological, social, and spiritual problems related to the disease
or its treatment. Also called palliative care, comfort care, and
symptom management.
38 | JASCAP
Surgeon: A doctor who removes or repairs a part of the body by
operating on the patient.
Surgery (SER-juh-ree): A procedure to remove or repair a part of
the body or to find out whether disease is present. An operation.
Symptom: An indication that a person has a condition or disease.
Some examples of symptoms are headache, fever, fatigue, nausea,
vomiting, and pain.
Systemic therapy (sis-TEM-ik THER-a-pee): Treatment using
substances that travel through the bloodstream, reaching and
affecting cells all over the body.
Thyroid (THIGH-royd): A gland located beneath the voice box
(larynx) that produces thyroid hormone. The thyroid helps regulate
growth and metabolism.
Tissue (TIH-shoo): A group or layer of cells that are alike and that
work together to perform a specific function.
Tumor (TOO-mer): A mass of excess tissue that results from
abnormal cell division. Tumors perform no useful body function.
They may be benign (not cancerous) or malignant (cancerous).
Tumor marker: A substance sometimes found in the blood, other
body fluids, or tissues. A high level of tumor marker may mean
that a certain type of cancer is in the body. Examples of tumor
markers include CA 125 (ovarian cancer), CA 15-3 (breast cancer),
CEA (ovarian, lung, breast, pancreas, and gastrointestinal tract
cancers), and PSA (prostate cancer). Also called biomarker.
Ultrasound: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves
(ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make
echoes. The echo patterns are shown on the screen of an ultrasound
machine, forming a picture of body tissues called a sonogram.
Also called ultrasonography.
Ultraviolet radiation (ul-tra-VYE-o-let ray-dee- AY-shun): UV
radiation. Invisible rays that are part of the energy that comes from
the sun. UV radiation also comes from sun lamps and tanning
beds. UV radiation can damage the skin and cause melanoma and
other types of skin cancer. UV radiation that reaches the Earth’s
Cancer Simplified | 39
surface is made up of two types of rays, called UVA and UVB rays.
UVB rays are more likely than UVA rays to cause sunburn, but
UVA rays pass deeper into the skin. Scientists have long thought
that UVB radiation can cause melanoma and other types of skin
cancer. They now think that UVA radiation also may add to skin
damage that can lead to skin cancer and cause premature aging.
For this reason, skin specialists recommend that people use
sunscreens that reflect, absorb, or scatter both kinds of UV radiation.
Virtual colonoscopy (ko-lun-AHS-ko-pee): A method under study
to examine the colon by taking a series of x-rays (called a CT scan)
and using a high-powered computer to reconstruct 2-D and 3-D
pictures of the interior surfaces of the colon from these x-rays. The
pictures can be saved, manipulated to better viewing angles, and
reviewed after the procedure, even years later. Also called
computed tomography colography.
Virus (VYE-rus): A microorganism that can infect cells and cause
disease.
X-ray: A type of high-energy radiation. In low doses, x-rays are
used to diagnose diseases by making pictures of the inside of the
body. In high doses, x-rays are used to treat cancer.
Contact Us
For further information please contact us on 022-6534 5040 on
Mondays through Fridays 10 am to 5 pm (phone) or
ganpathykv3@gmail.com or uma2272@gmail.com (email). You
can also visit our website (www.jascap.org) and download pdf
copies of our books free of cost.
40 | JASCAP
Notes
Cancer Simplified | 41
Notes
42 | JASCAP
JASCAP: We need your help
We hope that you found this booklet useful
To help other patients and their families we need and intend to extend
our Patient Information Services in many ways.
Our Trust depends on voluntary donations. Please send your donation
by cheque or D/D payable in Mumbai in favour of "JASCAP".
DISCLAIMER
This book is not intended to replace the opinion and advise
of your doctor or a healthcare professional. This book is
only for improved understanding of what your doctor or
healthcare professional has told you/ will tell you. While
care has been taken to ensure that this book contains factual
information, medical science is not mathematics and new
information is constantly being made available. Hence
readers are advised to discuss and verify all doubts with their
treating doctor or healthcare professional. Any statement
made in this book should not be considered as a
recommendation or endorsement of any product or
procedure.
We will be happy to receive your feedback regarding the
information in this booklet
JASCAP
JEET ASSOCIATION FOR SUPPORT TO CANCER PATIENTS
Website: www.jascap.org
MUMBAI OFFICE :
JASCAP Phone : 91-22-6534 5040
C/O ABHAY BHAGAT & CO., 91-22-2617 7543
OFFICE NO.4, "SHILPA", 91-22-2616 0007
7TH. RD., PRABHAT COLONY, Fax : 91-22-2618 6162
SANTACRUZ (EAST), e-mail : pkrjascap@gmail.com
MUMBAI - 400 055. abhay@abhaybhagat.com
AHMEDABAD : MR. D.K.GOSWAMY,
1002, LABH, SHUKAN TOWER,
NEAR JUDGES' BUNGALOWS,
AHMEDABAD - 380 015.
Phone :91-79-6522 4287.
Mobile:93270 10529
e-mail :dkgoswamy@sify.com
BANGALORE : MS. SUPRIYA GOPI,
455, I CROSS,
HAL III STAGE,
BANGALORE - 560 075
Phone :098863 11931
e-mail :supriyakgopi@yahoo.co.in
HYDERABAD : MS. SUCHITA DINAKER &
DR. M. DINAKER, M.D.
FLAT NO. G4, 1st FLOOR,
"STERLING ELEGANZA", STREET NO.5,
NEHRUNAGAR, SECUNDERABAD - 500 026.
Phone :098492 14690
e-mail :suchitadinaker@yahoo.co.in
`````.
